Looking back, even Donald P. Borchers, one of the producers of Children of the Corn, acknowledges several mistakes in guiding the story away from the wishes of Stephen King. King's stab at the screenplay adaptation of his own short story was rejected in favor of a rewrite by George Goldsmith (um, Blue Monkey, anyone?). In the process, character nuance was dropped in favor of crowd pleasing good-versus-evil simplicity. Of course, these developmental problems were only the beginning. Pity director Fritz Kiersch trying to make the darn thing on an increasingly frayed shoestring for tight-fisted New World Pictures.

Considering the odds against it, Children of the Corn could be much worse. Given its scary concept, it could also be so much better, even though six (count 'em, six) sequels have thus far provided no such evidence. As it is, it's a--look, it has to be said--corny "B" horror flick with a certain je ne sais WTF about it. Peter Horton (thirtysomething) and Linda Hamilton (pre-Terminator) play young couple Burt and Vicky, whose cross-country drive to Seattle gets rudely interrupted just outside Gatlin, Nebraska, a town suspiciously not on the map. As we've seen in a prologue set three years earlier, Gatlin's entire adult population was killed by its child population. The kids live under the sway of boy preacher/cult leader Isaac (John Franklin), who has number-one disciple Malachi (Courtney Gains) do his bidding. Before you can say, "Bring him the blood of the outlanders," the children of the corn begin stalking (get it? stalk-ing? never mind...) Burt and Vicky. Burt and Vicky may not the sharpest tools in the shed, but they might be killed by them, if you know what I'm saying.

Children of the Corn recalls the old Star Trek episode "Miri," with its ghost town populated by kids looking to forget their history. Goldsmith's script includes some cautionary commentary about religious fundamentalism run amok (art, music and games are forbidden, and Burt blurts, "Any religion without love and compassion is false! It's a lie!"). Unfortunately, the narrative ignores logic and fatally fails to give any intellectual or emotional underpinning to its villain: who is this Isaac, anyway? And how and why did he get the idea to upturn the Biblical myth of his namesake by taking a cue from God to kill parents? No answers emerge, only more questions and a fairly typical King-ly supernatural beastie, referred to ominously as "He Who Walks Behind the Rows." The creature is the crux of a finale partly done in by one of the worst explosive special effects ever purveyed by a supposedly "A"-picture.

Where Children of the Corn comes closest to succeeding is in its oft-vaunted atmosphere. A better director could have done more with it, but then again, many would have done too much with it. Part of what makes the movie mildly creepy is Kiersch's flat photography of small towns surrounding Des Moines, Iowa and his art department's loopy folk art, converted from Baptist to cultist. That said, Kiersch's work is still slack, and his pace leaden, with many embarrassingly (non)threatening shots of corn. Plus, Goldsmith and Kiersch commit the cinematic sin of making R.G. Armstrong look bad. Forced to act mostly all by his lonesome as a gas station attendant who knows too much, Armstrong isn't up to selling a lengthy one-way "conversation" with He Who Drives the Plot.
